README.md, before:

# DeepaData — EDM v0.4 (Specification)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.17808652.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17808652)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-0.4.0_RC-green.svg)](https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/releases/tag/v0.4.0)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-Release_Candidate-orange.svg)]()

**Status:** Release Candidate (v0.4.0) — Seeking community feedback before v1.0

---

## Why EDM Exists

**Everyone is building memory for AI. No one is building identity governance for emotional data.**

As AI agents gain persistent memory (Mem0, OpenAI Memory, etc.) and communicate via standardized protocols (MCP, A2A), a critical gap remains: **there is no governance-first standard for emotional data**.

EDM fills this gap by providing:
- A **portable schema** for emotional context (not locked to any vendor)
- **Compliance by design** (GDPR, HIPAA, EU AI Act ready)
- **Non-inferential representation** (explicit data only, no psychological reconstruction)
- The foundation for **.ddna** — a cryptographically-signed emotional identity artifact

---

## Official Publication

The EDM v0.4.0 whitepaper is published on Zenodo:

**Citation:**
> Harvey, J. (2025). Emotional Data Model (EDM) v0.4.0 (Version v2). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17808652

**Full Whitepaper:** [Download PDF from Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/17808878)

---

## Overview

The **Emotional Data Model (EDM) v0.4.0** is a governance-first schema for representing emotional context in AI systems. It defines a domain-complete, schema-bound format that externalizes affective context as a deterministic, model-agnostic data object.

**Key principles:**
- **Transient by default** — EDM artifacts should not persist beyond session windows (24 hours max) unless explicitly sealed in a .ddna envelope
- **Non-inferential** — No field may contain psychological inference or behavioral prediction
- **Portable** — Works across any LLM provider, memory system, or agent framework
- **Compliant** — Built for GDPR, CCPA, HIPAA, EU AI Act from day one

This repository contains:

- Canonical JSON Schema for EDM v0.4.0
- Domain Fragment Schemas (10 domains, 96 fields)
- Migration Crosswalks (v0.3 to v0.4)
- Complete Documentation
- Validation Tools & Examples

---

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec.git
cd deepadata-edm-spec

# Validate an artifact
npm install -g ajv-cli
ajv validate -s schema/edm.v0.4.schema.json -d examples/simple_memory.ddna.json
```

### Using in Your Project

**JavaScript/TypeScript:**
```javascript
import edmSchema from 'deepadata-edm-spec/schema/edm.v0.4.schema.json';
import Ajv from 'ajv';

const ajv = new Ajv();
const validate = ajv.compile(edmSchema);

if (validate(artifact)) {
  console.log('Valid EDM v0.4 artifact');
} else {
  console.error('Validation failed:', validate.errors);
}
```

**Python:**
```python
import json
import jsonschema

with open('schema/edm.v0.4.schema.json') as f:
    schema = json.load(f)

with open('artifact.json') as f:
    artifact = json.load(f)

jsonschema.validate(instance=artifact, schema=schema)
print("Valid EDM v0.4 artifact")
```

---

## Schema Structure

EDM v0.4.0 defines **10 mandatory domains** (96 fields total):

### Representational Layer (57 fields)

- **CORE** (7 fields) - Narrative anchors: anchor, spark, wound, fuel, bridge, echo, narrative
- **CONSTELLATION** (18 fields) - Affective topology: emotions, narrative arcs, relational dynamics
- **MILKY_WAY** (5 fields) - Contextual framing: event type, location, people, tone shifts
- **GRAVITY** (15 fields) - Salience geometry: emotional weight, density, recall triggers
- **IMPULSE** (12 fields) - Motivational state: energy, drive, orientation, regulation

### Infrastructure Layer (39 fields)

- **META** (15 fields) - Identity & provenance: id, version, timestamps, consent, visibility
- **GOVERNANCE** (12 fields) - Rights & compliance: jurisdiction, retention, subject rights, k-anonymity
- **TELEMETRY** (4 fields) - Extraction metadata: model, confidence, alignment delta
- **SYSTEM** (3 fields) - Compute boundary: embeddings, indices, sector weights
- **CROSSWALKS** (5 fields) - Interoperability: Plutchik, Geneva Emotion Wheel, DSM-5, ISO mappings

[Complete Field Reference](docs/OVERVIEW.md)

---

## Compliance & Governance

EDM is designed for regulated environments:

| Regulation | EDM Support |
|------------|-------------|
| **EU AI Act** | Non-inferential representation; no behavioral prediction |
| **GDPR** | jurisdiction, consent_basis, subject_rights (portable, erasable, explainable) |
| **HIPAA** | policy_labels (health, biometrics), masking_rules, k_anonymity |
| **CCPA** | retention_policy, exportability controls |

The GOVERNANCE domain provides explicit fields for:
- Jurisdiction declaration (GDPR, CCPA, HIPAA, PIPEDA, LGPD)
- Retention policies (TTL, on_expiry actions)
- Subject rights (portable, erasable, explainable booleans)
- K-anonymity requirements
- Policy labels and masking rules

**See:** [EU AI Act Compliance Guide](docs/EU_AI_ACT_COMPLIANCE.md) for detailed regulatory mapping.

---

## Repository Structure

```
deepadata-edm-spec/
├── schema/
│   ├── edm.v0.4.schema.json          # Master schema
│   ├── fragments/                     # Domain-specific schemas
│   │   ├── core.json
│   │   ├── constellation.json
│   │   ├── governance.json           # Compliance & rights
│   │   └── ... (10 total)
│   └── crosswalks/
│       └── v0.3_to_v0.4.json         # Migration mapping
├── examples/
│   ├── simple_memory.ddna.json       # Basic example
│   └── multimodal_image_example.ddna.json
├── docs/
│   ├── OVERVIEW.md                   # Schema architecture
│   ├── EU_AI_ACT_COMPLIANCE.md       # Regulatory compliance guide
│   ├── V04_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md        # Migration instructions
│   ├── VALIDATION.md                 # Validation guide
│   └── RELEASE-NOTES.md
├── scripts/
│   └── validate-examples.mjs         # Validation utilities
├── CITATION.cff                      # Citation metadata
├── LICENSE                           # MIT License
└── README.md
```

---

## Migration from v0.3

If upgrading from EDM v0.3.x:

1. **Review changes:** 6 fields removed, GOVERNANCE domain added
2. **Migration guide:** [V04_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md](docs/V04_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md)
3. **Use crosswalk:** `schema/crosswalks/v0.3_to_v0.4.json`
4. **Test thoroughly:** Validate migrated artifacts against v0.4 schema

---

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! This is a Release Candidate seeking community feedback.

**Ways to contribute:**
- Open an [Issue](https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/issues) for bugs or suggestions
- Submit a Pull Request for schema improvements
- Join [Discussions](https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/discussions) for design questions
- Contact: jason@deepadata.com

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

---

## Citation

If you use EDM in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{harvey2025edm,
  author = {Harvey, Jason},
  title = {Emotional Data Model (EDM) v0.4.0},
  year = {2025},
  publisher = {Zenodo},
  version = {v0.4.0},
  doi = {10.5281/zenodo.17808652},
  url = {https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec}
}
```

---

## License

**MIT License** — See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

EDM is open source to enable proliferation and interoperability. The schema is free to use, modify, and distribute.

---

## About DeepaData

DeepaData builds governance-first infrastructure for emotional AI:

- **EDM** — Emotional Data Model (this specification)
- **.ddna** — Portable, signed emotional identity artifact
- **Control Governor** — Coherence regulation for agentic workflows

**Mission:** Make emotional AI safe, governed, and user-sovereign.

Website: [deepadata.com](https://deepadata.com)
GitHub: [@deepadata](https://github.com/deepadata)
Contact: jason@deepadata.com

---

## Links

- **Whitepaper:** [Zenodo Record](https://zenodo.org/records/17808878)
- **DOI:** [10.5281/zenodo.17808652](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17808652)
- **Repository:** https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec
- **Issues:** https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/issues

---

**Last Updated:** January 2026
**Version:** 0.4.0 (Release Candidate)
**License:** MIT

Commit message:

Complete Phase A: Stabilise public understanding
Add documentation to prevent misinterpretation of EDM now that the
specification is public:

- docs/SCOPE_AND_NONGOALS.md: Define what EDM is and is not, establish
  interpretation vs inference boundary, clarify tooling as non-normative
- docs/EDM_DDNA_BOUNDARY.md: Separate transient EDM from persistent .ddna,
  explain architectural layering and commitment semantics
- SECURITY.md: Security policy for schema-level concerns, vulnerability
  reporting, privacy considerations for emotional data

Update README.md with scope section and links to new documentation.

No schema changes. Documentation only.

README.md, after:

# DeepaData — EDM v0.4 (Specification)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.17808652.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17808652)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-0.4.0_RC-green.svg)](https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/releases/tag/v0.4.0)
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-Release_Candidate-orange.svg)]()

**Status:** Release Candidate (v0.4.0) — Seeking community feedback before v1.0

---

## Why EDM Exists

**Everyone is building memory for AI. No one is building identity governance for emotional data.**

As AI agents gain persistent memory (Mem0, OpenAI Memory, etc.) and communicate via standardized protocols (MCP, A2A), a critical gap remains: **there is no governance-first standard for emotional data**.

EDM fills this gap by providing:
- A **portable schema** for emotional context (not locked to any vendor)
- **Compliance by design** (GDPR, HIPAA, EU AI Act ready)
- **Non-inferential representation** (explicit data only, no psychological reconstruction)
- The foundation for **.ddna** — a cryptographically-signed emotional identity artifact

---

## Scope and Non-Goals

**EDM is:** A data format specification. It defines structure and semantics for emotional context that can be validated, exchanged, and governed.

**EDM is not:**
- An identity provider (Auth0-class systems remain external)
- A certificate authority or regulator
- A memory store, agent runtime, or analytics system
- An emotion recognizer or prediction system

**Tooling is non-normative.** Any tooling built around EDM (validators, SDKs, CLI tools) is reference implementation only. The canonical JSON Schema remains the sole source of truth.

**See:** [Scope and Non-Goals](docs/SCOPE_AND_NONGOALS.md) | [EDM and .ddna Boundary](docs/EDM_DDNA_BOUNDARY.md)

---

## Official Publication

The EDM v0.4.0 whitepaper is published on Zenodo:

**Citation:**
> Harvey, J. (2025). Emotional Data Model (EDM) v0.4.0 (Version v2). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17808652

**Full Whitepaper:** [Download PDF from Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/17808878)

---

## Overview

The **Emotional Data Model (EDM) v0.4.0** is a governance-first schema for representing emotional context in AI systems. It defines a domain-complete, schema-bound format that externalizes affective context as a deterministic, model-agnostic data object.

**Key principles:**
- **Transient by default** — EDM artifacts should not persist beyond session windows (24 hours max) unless explicitly sealed in a .ddna envelope
- **Non-inferential** — No field may contain psychological inference or behavioral prediction
- **Portable** — Works across any LLM provider, memory system, or agent framework
- **Compliant** — Built for GDPR, CCPA, HIPAA, EU AI Act from day one

This repository contains:

- Canonical JSON Schema for EDM v0.4.0
- Domain Fragment Schemas (10 domains, 96 fields)
- Migration Crosswalks (v0.3 to v0.4)
- Complete Documentation
- Validation Tools & Examples

---

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec.git
cd deepadata-edm-spec

# Validate an artifact
npm install -g ajv-cli
ajv validate -s schema/edm.v0.4.schema.json -d examples/simple_memory.ddna.json
```

### Using in Your Project

**JavaScript/TypeScript:**
```javascript
import edmSchema from 'deepadata-edm-spec/schema/edm.v0.4.schema.json';
import Ajv from 'ajv';

const ajv = new Ajv();
const validate = ajv.compile(edmSchema);

if (validate(artifact)) {
  console.log('Valid EDM v0.4 artifact');
} else {
  console.error('Validation failed:', validate.errors);
}
```

**Python:**
```python
import json
import jsonschema

with open('schema/edm.v0.4.schema.json') as f:
    schema = json.load(f)

with open('artifact.json') as f:
    artifact = json.load(f)

jsonschema.validate(instance=artifact, schema=schema)
print("Valid EDM v0.4 artifact")
```

---

## Schema Structure

EDM v0.4.0 defines **10 mandatory domains** (96 fields total):

### Representational Layer (57 fields)

- **CORE** (7 fields) - Narrative anchors: anchor, spark, wound, fuel, bridge, echo, narrative
- **CONSTELLATION** (18 fields) - Affective topology: emotions, narrative arcs, relational dynamics
- **MILKY_WAY** (5 fields) - Contextual framing: event type, location, people, tone shifts
- **GRAVITY** (15 fields) - Salience geometry: emotional weight, density, recall triggers
- **IMPULSE** (12 fields) - Motivational state: energy, drive, orientation, regulation

### Infrastructure Layer (39 fields)

- **META** (15 fields) - Identity & provenance: id, version, timestamps, consent, visibility
- **GOVERNANCE** (12 fields) - Rights & compliance: jurisdiction, retention, subject rights, k-anonymity
- **TELEMETRY** (4 fields) - Extraction metadata: model, confidence, alignment delta
- **SYSTEM** (3 fields) - Compute boundary: embeddings, indices, sector weights
- **CROSSWALKS** (5 fields) - Interoperability: Plutchik, Geneva Emotion Wheel, DSM-5, ISO mappings

[Complete Field Reference](docs/OVERVIEW.md)

---

## Compliance & Governance

EDM is designed for regulated environments:

| Regulation | EDM Support |
|------------|-------------|
| **EU AI Act** | Non-inferential representation; no behavioral prediction |
| **GDPR** | jurisdiction, consent_basis, subject_rights (portable, erasable, explainable) |
| **HIPAA** | policy_labels (health, biometrics), masking_rules, k_anonymity |
| **CCPA** | retention_policy, exportability controls |

The GOVERNANCE domain provides explicit fields for:
- Jurisdiction declaration (GDPR, CCPA, HIPAA, PIPEDA, LGPD)
- Retention policies (TTL, on_expiry actions)
- Subject rights (portable, erasable, explainable booleans)
- K-anonymity requirements
- Policy labels and masking rules

**See:** [EU AI Act Compliance Guide](docs/EU_AI_ACT_COMPLIANCE.md) for detailed regulatory mapping.

---

## Repository Structure

```
deepadata-edm-spec/
├── schema/
│   ├── edm.v0.4.schema.json          # Master schema
│   ├── fragments/                     # Domain-specific schemas
│   │   ├── core.json
│   │   ├── constellation.json
│   │   ├── governance.json           # Compliance & rights
│   │   └── ... (10 total)
│   └── crosswalks/
│       └── v0.3_to_v0.4.json         # Migration mapping
├── examples/
│   ├── simple_memory.ddna.json       # Basic example
│   └── multimodal_image_example.ddna.json
├── docs/
│   ├── OVERVIEW.md                   # Schema architecture
│   ├── SCOPE_AND_NONGOALS.md         # What EDM is and is not
│   ├── EDM_DDNA_BOUNDARY.md          # Transient vs persistent
│   ├── EU_AI_ACT_COMPLIANCE.md       # Regulatory compliance guide
│   ├── V04_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md        # Migration instructions
│   ├── VALIDATION.md                 # Validation guide
│   └── RELEASE-NOTES.md
├── scripts/
│   └── validate-examples.mjs         # Validation utilities
├── CITATION.cff                      # Citation metadata
├── LICENSE                           # MIT License
├── SECURITY.md                       # Security policy
└── README.md
```

---

## Migration from v0.3

If upgrading from EDM v0.3.x:

1. **Review changes:** 6 fields removed, GOVERNANCE domain added
2. **Migration guide:** [V04_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md](docs/V04_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md)
3. **Use crosswalk:** `schema/crosswalks/v0.3_to_v0.4.json`
4. **Test thoroughly:** Validate migrated artifacts against v0.4 schema

---

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! This is a Release Candidate seeking community feedback.

**Ways to contribute:**
- Open an [Issue](https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/issues) for bugs or suggestions
- Submit a Pull Request for schema improvements
- Join [Discussions](https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/discussions) for design questions
- Contact: jason@deepadata.com

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

**Security issues:** Please report vulnerabilities privately via [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md).

---

## Citation

If you use EDM in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{harvey2025edm,
  author = {Harvey, Jason},
  title = {Emotional Data Model (EDM) v0.4.0},
  year = {2025},
  publisher = {Zenodo},
  version = {v0.4.0},
  doi = {10.5281/zenodo.17808652},
  url = {https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec}
}
```

---

## License

**MIT License** — See [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

EDM is open source to enable proliferation and interoperability. The schema is free to use, modify, and distribute.

---

## About DeepaData

DeepaData builds governance-first infrastructure for emotional AI:

- **EDM** — Emotional Data Model (this specification)
- **.ddna** — Portable, signed emotional identity artifact
- **Control Governor** — Coherence regulation for agentic workflows

**Mission:** Make emotional AI safe, governed, and user-sovereign.

Website: [deepadata.com](https://deepadata.com)
GitHub: [@deepadata](https://github.com/deepadata)
Contact: jason@deepadata.com

---

## Links

- **Whitepaper:** [Zenodo Record](https://zenodo.org/records/17808878)
- **DOI:** [10.5281/zenodo.17808652](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17808652)
- **Repository:** https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec
- **Issues:** https://github.com/deepadata/deepadata-edm-spec/issues

---

**Last Updated:** January 2026
**Version:** 0.4.0 (Release Candidate)
**License:** MIT
